Okay. All right. So thank you everyone for coming. What we want to do today is do an
update on where we at when it comes to working with databases in R. So last year we introduced
some concepts of how we see the world when it comes to being able to access remote data
and be able to get results and analysis done in the best possible way for an R user to
do. And the idea there is, as I have here in overview, is to be able to send and push
all the computation back to the database and then just bring back the results, right? If
you think in terms of what the SQL database does, it has the data and it also has a SQL
engine and that SQL engine does most of the stuff that we do in local R today, right?
So we group data, we filter data, we select data, and all that stuff can be done in the
database. So we introduced those concepts of doing that and we've been talking through
different conferences and even to the class. So what I wanted to do today is kind of give
an update and for you to know where more resources are, starting with this one. So db.rstudio.com,
if you work with databases in R, I would absolutely suggest that you bookmark this in your browser.
We've been, the one that we had last year had all the basic stuff such as the packages
that we're going to use as well as the different back ends that you can connect to and how
you can do that through ODBC and the DBI package. Ever since then, we have added more best practice
articles and I think this is one of the major things that you can take from this talk is
like this would be a good place to start if you have questions about specific things of
how to do. Because what's going to happen is that we're going to start with simpler
exercises and then we're going to get more complex and there may be some issues getting
to that through that complexity. So it has, the site has a search bar that you can use
to be able to perform some, like if you're looking for schema information, I don't work
with schemas, it's already, it shows you all the results and you can easily go to that
article. Another thing that we have here and it's, as far as, as you were reading through
the introduction for this talk about techniques, one of the things we've seen that customers
sometimes struggle with is actually publishing the content, right, from a shiny app that
you have local that you wanted to run now on something like RStudio Connect, for example,
or shiny server pro or something like that. How do you transfer the credentials? How do
you handle the security? We have actually three articles that handle security in here,
so I would recommend that if you are getting to that point, just like what Joe was talking
about, you know, as you go into production and try to scale it up, this is, this is often
times becomes a challenge and we have some resources here. Another resources is, resource,
excuse me, is the RStudio community. There's a special tag for databases, so if you have
questions about how to do certain things with databases and R, you can post it here. Also,
as you continue to learn and get better at it, you're more than welcome to post answers
because we appreciate how the community comes together and help, help each other out, especially
as we're learning how, what things we can do better to improve these interfaces that
we have been working on. So, those are the, like, two resources, the latest that we have.
Um, the other thing is, I'm going to take a chance here and I want to, I'm going to
go real quick through, okay. Uh, so the, the script that, uh, Jonathan showed, I had a
little demo for that, but now after seeing his super cool demo, I'm very self-conscious
about it, so you can see it there and you just saw it earlier. So, the next thing is
RStudio Connect. Uh, I'm sorry about the flickering, but I don't have a way to show
this in, uh, live right now. Um, in RStudio Connect, now you're able to, uh, set environment
variables and those environment variables are, um, encrypted, both in disk and also
in the memory. So, if you have a, a situation where you need to, uh, have the, the credentials
that that shiny app is using, um, in the pub, published version, then you can leverage
that and connect. So, that's another, uh, new one that, uh, we actually are start
recommending a lot based, whenever there's certain, uh, challenges to using something
like a DSN or, um, or something like Kerberos, for example. Also, we've seen, uh, as far
as, in, in a year's time, how, uh, folks have, that have adopted using, uh, dplyr, uh, with, uh,
databases and let it do the translation for you. How it, they start wrapping, uh, these,
uh, more complex stuff inside functions and they start using things like, um, uh, things
like Perl, for example, and Rlang. And so, I'm very excited about that because, um, I
was expecting us to get to this point, um, a little bit longer time frame than, than, than
where we are now. So, I think it, as you, um, go and, and start, uh, practicing using, um,
connecting to, with DBI and using ODBC and using dplyr, that, um, there's definitely
techniques that we're gonna be expanding our, our, our, the articles in db.rcu.com to
cover this kind of thing. So, once you start getting, uh, having those needs of doing
something like, uh, recursive, uh, sending recursive, uh, SQL statements, how we can do
that more economically against the database. Another cool thing, and I'm glad this one's
not flickering, is that the universe is expanding. Um, I, uh, did a, a quick analysis of,
uh, cram packages as far as, uh, all the packages that depend on DBI or dbplyr and also
that said something about database or query inside the title or description and ended up
finding 61 packages. Uh, 61 packages that, uh, essentially gives us more functionality
that the, the functionality I'm talking about today, um, that, uh, adds to more things
that we can do with databases. So, uh, we have things here like, uh, the connections, uh,
that, for example, there are postgres, uh, we have, uh, dbparser here. We have dbplyr
teradata, so we have some, uh, vendor specific ones. Oops, sorry. Okay. Uh, vendor
specific ones as well as, come back here, um, as well as ones that extend functionality
such as, uh, tidy predict and, uh, dbplot for example. Um, another thing I wanted to show
is that we have, um, of those 61 packages, uh, I posted here, like, when were the last
update done in cram and I was surprised how basically at least more than half been updated
since last year and access here, 87 percent has been updated since 2017. I don't know if
you have had the, the same situation as I have that, uh, you go and you find like a group of
packages that you really like or a package and then you find out the last time it was
updated was like 2001. So, like, oh, it may not work out for me. So, this is, I'm very
excited about that too. So, let's do a quick demo. Um, I want to show some, uh, techniques
for connecting, exploring, visualizing, uh, uh, data that we're going to have in a
database. Um, we're going to use, uh, several packages I have listed here, uh, such as, uh,
dbplyr as we talked about. We're going to use leaflet, uh, and also a little bit of purr
and rlang. Uh, the data is, uh, I figured that since we're in Austin and, uh, we could use
Austin open data, we're going to do that. So, it's, uh, data that's, uh, available, uh, on
BigQuery, uh, that, uh, shows where, uh, different 311 calls. So, you have 9-1-1 calls
that are for emergency police. Uh, 3-1-1 is like the non-emergency police. And, and we'll
look at this data here. So, let me switch over, do the demo. So, I'm going to do this here.
Hopefully it's a little bit more legible that way. Okay. So, let's, let's, let's, uh,
so, the first thing I'm going to do is I'm going to connect to, uh, BigQuery. Uh, and I'm
very excited about this one because, um, it, it's data that's, again, it's public. Uh, usually
my, my, um, shoot, sorry, thank you. Uh, thank you. I was starting to sweat a little bit. Um,
usually data that I demo is data that I have like in my laptop, on the SQL server, stuff like
that. So, this one is something that, uh, once you have the code, you can try it out
yourselves. Um, so, we're going to do a pointer to the 311 services and we're going to use
glimpse. So, this is deep layer command that's running inside the database and bringing
back essentially the same information that you would, would as if, as if it was local. Uh, but
it's obviously not, not in my laptop. So, I'm getting, uh, all the information here. You can
see we have, uh, the complaint descriptions, right? Uh, we have dead birds, loose dogs, uh,
animal service, uh, stuff. Um, also when, when it was open, when it was closed and most, uh,
importantly because it's going to be what we're going to do today, it's, uh, geocoded. So,
we're going to look at the longitude latitude of it. Um, to take a look real quick, uh, see how
big this data is. Um, it's not huge, right? Uh, it's 640,000 records. Uh, but again, it's
I don't have any of that in my laptop. Everything is running against, uh, uh, the, the
BigQuery, uh, table. Here I want to see the, the top ten, uh, most used, um, complaint
description. Uh, you'll notice that it's running against BigQuery and it's telling me how
many records it's bringing back. So, it's only bringing back ten records. So, that's all
that it went back and forth. The internet and me right now and I'm analyzing 600,000
records live here, right? And it's, uh, immediately I can see the, the top ten with no
problems. So, uh, that's like the coolest thing ever, right? Because I'm using our markdown
here to publish all this information, uh, all this analysis without having to preload all
this data. I'm going to do some data cleanup real quick because some, uh, records weren't
properly geocoded. So, I'm doing that. Uh, so the first one is I'm going to do, I'm going to
take just the loose dot complaints and see, uh, where they are located, right? So, I'm
going to run this. I'm going to use dbplot. So, instead of doing a, uh, um, a dot plot, I'm
going to do, uh, a raster plot so I don't have to bring back, you know, however, I think
it's 41,000 records back to, uh, R and then have a bunch of dots that are going to be hard
for me to, to, to see where they are. Um, rather we can do a raster so it's a lot less, uh,
results. But, as you can see here, this doesn't say anything, right? Because we have no frame
of reference here where these dots are located in real life. So, what we'll do is we'll use a, uh,
function called dbcompute raster that dbplot has. Uh, and what that does is that it will run
the same calculations that we did for the raster but instead of giving me a ggplot, um, object,
it's giving me a, um, a data frame, right? A table. And what's cool is that, again, I just, every
time I'm just calculating against the, uh, the database and I'm only bringing back 484 rows
instead of the 41,000 rows, right? So, it's all that's been calculated. Um, I want to, since
I'm going to use leaflet, I'm, I want to draw the, um, the squares. As you can see here, I can't
draw a square just with the two, uh, points of reference here. So, I'm just going to create a
quick function. As you can see, I'm using rlang to, to do that. So, uh, you don't need to, you
know, have to create a huge package to start learning tidy eval. It's, tidy eval is your
friend, trust me. Um, uh, you're welcome to try it. And you, you start getting a lot of, uh,
quick functionality for yourself. Uh, I'm going to run the locations, uh, against, uh, the
new, um, function and something before I forget about this function. So, I, what's neat
about it is that I can do locations and then pipe it directly into my new tidy eval
function and say size and now have my autocomplete function that works, right? So, I can
start typing latitude and it works. Just like if you were creating your own tidy function. So, it
makes it where it's easily pipeable for you. So, that's one of the big advantages that you
gain by using that. So, uh, and then we're going to create our squares. Now, you can see
that we have, we went from just one for each longitude and latitude. Now, we have the, the
squares themselves, uh, that I can draw. Next, I'm going to actually use leaflet to see where
they are. So, much easier. You can see it here. Uh, but again, now we know where they are, but
we don't know, okay, where's the concentration of, uh, loose docs calls. Alright. So, what
we'll do is that we're going to, uh, the DB, uh, the DB plot function will return the number
of, uh, records concentrated in that, uh, in that square. So, what we'll do is like, we're
going to make the, the number, the max number of calls, the, the more, the redder of the, of
the squares and the less number of calls, the lighter red. So, it'll make it, uh, visually
easier to, uh, to see where the calls are, right? So, we're making it fancy now. And on top of
that, we also added some, uh, pop ups. So, I can click on, on here and see that there's, uh,
twelve hundred calls, uh, in this section of Austin, there's 128. You see, it's a lot easier
to, to navigate. So, like this section is so red that I can't even see what area is in, in the
map. But, uh, very cool that now I'm able to do this analysis again against the database. I
don't, haven't brought anything. So, let's make it even fancier and get, uh, add the dot where
we are, right? So, this is where we're at right now. Hopefully Google Maps gave me the right
geolocation. So, if you're a local and I'm not 100 percent correct, please don't blame me.
Alright, so, we see here where, where we are and where the concentration is. Uh, so we feel safe
now that we don't, we're not gonna get, um, uh, to see too many loose dogs apparently. Uh, so,
uh, that's gonna work out great. Alright, so, shoot, it didn't tell me to do this. Good, okay.
Got five minutes, I'm gonna run through this real quick. Um, with model DB, which is a, a new
package that's, it's been since 2018. Uh, you can actually run some models inside the
database. Uh, one of them is K-means. So, let me switch here. Uh, what it's doing right now,
it's, um, taking all the, the longitudinal latitude and it goes through its iteration and see
if the, the average is less than the previous run. So, basically what K-means done in R, but
it's doing it against the database. It's running SQL statements until it finds one that's
optimal to, uh, the calculations. In this case, it's gonna run, I think, 17 cycles. Um, and
then we'll, uh, we'll be able to see it here. Um, so this should be the last one. So now I have,
um, what it considers an optimal, uh, center for each of them and it gives me three centers.
That's the default. And, uh, you can see the, the actual SQL statement and you'll see that
numbers here of the calculations. So, um, let me run this quickly. Um, so this is the
one. Now I can place the, the squares of my, uh, three segments against, um, uh, against
the map. And again, I'm going back and forth with the database. I am overlaying where my
squares are. Um, and then this last one, hopefully have enough time. This, this is the one
that takes a bit longer because what I'm doing is I'm, I'm using a per command to get, to
do DB, um, uh, to calculate the raster for each of the centers. Give them a different color
and then you can see each color, uh, where the, uh, each center where the calls are, right?
So everything I did, I just did against the database and I'm able to have all my results in
R and all the computation and the modeling and the rest of the plot were done remotely. So
this is the kind of thing that we want to continue on building up on and obviously even
improve the, the, the, the cancer transitions we have today. So all right, women, thank you.